￼
CONSTITUTIONAL DOCUMENTS AVAILABLE for  FRANCE
Editor’s Note to the Constitution of the French Republic
Introductory Note to the Constitution of the French Republic
The Constitution of the French Republic, 1958 (as Amended to 2005)
Constitutional Law No. 2003-267 of March 25, 2003
Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003
Constitutional Law No. 2005-204 of March 1, 2005
Constitutional Law No. 2005-205 of March 1, 2005
The Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, 1789
The Preamble of the Constitution of 1946
The Charter of the Environment, 2004
 
 

THE CONSTITUTION [OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC]  OF OCTOBER 4, 1958  (As amended to March 1, 2005)[1]
Table of Contents
Preamble
Title I On Sovereignty
Title II The President of the Republic
Title III The Government
Title IV The Parliament
Title V On Relations Between Parliament and the Government
Title VI On Treaties and International Agreements
Title VII The Constitutional Council
Title VIII On Judicial Authority
Title IX The High Court of Justice
Title X On the Penal Responsibility of Members of the Government
Title XI The Economic and Social Council
Title XII The Territorial Units
Title XIII Transitional Provisions Concerning New Caledonia
Title XIV On Association Agreements
Title XV On the European Communities and the European Union
Title XV On the European Union
Title XVI On the Revision of the Constitution
Title XVII

PREAMBLE
The French people solemnly proclaim their attachment to the Rights of Man and to the principles of national sovereignty as defined by the Declaration of 1789, reaffirmed (confirmée) and complemented by the Preamble to the Constitution of 1946, and to the rights and obligations defined by the Charter of the Environment of 2004.[2]
By virtue of these principles and that of the free determination of peoples, the Republic offers to the overseas territories that express the will to adhere to them new institutions founded on the common ideal of liberty, equality and fraternity and conceived with a view to their democratic development.
Article 1[3]
France is an indivisible, secular, democratic and social Republic. It assures the equality of all citizens before the law, without distinction of origin, race or religion. It respects all beliefs. Its organization is decentralized.[4]
TITLE I  ON SOVEREIGNTY
Article 2
The language of the Republic is French.[5]
The national emblem is the blue, white and red tricolor flag.
The national anthem is La Marseillaise.
The motto of the Republic is “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.”
Its principle is: government of the people, by the people and for the people.
Article 3
National sovereignty belongs to the people, who exercise it through their representatives and by means of referendum.
No section of the people nor any individual may attribute its exercise to itself or to himself.
Suffrage may be direct or indirect under the conditions specified by the Constitution. It is always universal, equal and secret.
Electors are, under the conditions determined by law, all French citizens of both sexes who have reached their majority and are in possession of their civil and political rights.
The law promotes the equal access of women and men to the electoral mandates and elective functions.[6]
Article 4
Political parties and groups contribute to the exercise (expression) of suffrage. They are formed and exercise their activity freely. They must respect the principles of national sovereignty and democracy.
They contribute to the implementation of the principle stated in the last paragraph of Article 3 under the conditions determined by the law.[7]
TITLE II  THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
Article 5
The President of the Republic shall see to it (veille) that the Constitution is respected. He shall ensure (assure), by his arbitration, the proper functioning of the public authorities and the continuity of the State.
He is the guarantor of national independence, territorial integrity and observance (respect) of treaties.[8]
Article 6[9]
The President of the Republic is elected for five years[10] by direct universal suffrage.
The manner of implementation of this article is determined by an organic law.
Article 7[11]
The President of the Republic is elected by an absolute majority of the votes cast. If such a majority is not obtained on the first ballot, a second ballot shall take place on the fourteenth following day.[12] Only the two candidates who received the greatest number of votes in the first ballot, taking into account any withdrawal of candidates with more votes, may present themselves in the second ballot.
The balloting begins on the announcement (convocation) of the Government.
The election of the new President shall be held not less than twenty days and not more than thirty-five days before the expiry of the powers of the President in office.
If the Presidency of the Republic falls vacant for any reason whatsoever, or if the Constitutional Council on a request by the Government by an absolute majority of its members determines that the President of the Republic is incapacitated, the duties of the President of the Republic, with the exception of those specified in Articles 11 and 12, shall be temporarily exercised by the President of the Senate or, if the latter is in turn incapacitated, by the Government.
In any case of a vacancy, or when the incapacity of the President is declared permanent (définitif) by the Constitutional Council, the ballot for the election of the new President, except in the event of a finding by the Constitutional Council of force majeure, is held not less then twenty days and not more than thirty-five days after the beginning of the vacancy or the declaration that the incapacity is of a permanent character.
If, in the seven days preceding the last day for lodging presentation of candidature, any of the persons who, less than thirty days prior to that day, have publicly announced their decision to be a candidate dies or becomes incapacitated, the Constitutional Council can decide to postpone the election.
If, before the first ballot, any of the candidates dies or becomes incapacitated, the Constitutional Council declares the election postponed.
In case of the death or incapacitation of either of the two candidates most favored in the first ballot before any withdrawals, the Constitutional Council declares that the electoral procedure must be repeated in full; the same applies in case of death or incapacitation of either of the two candidates remaining for the second ballot.
All cases are referred to the Constitutional Council under the conditions specified in the second paragraph of Article 61 or in that determined for the presentation of a candidate in the organic law provided for in Article 6 above.
The Constitutional Council may extend the time limits set in the third and fifth paragraphs, provided that polling takes place not later than thirty-five days after the decision of the Constitutional Council. If the application of the provisions of this paragraph results in the postponement of the election beyond the expiry of the term of the President in office, the latter shall remain in office until the proclamation of his successor.[13]
Neither Articles 49 and 50 nor Article 89 of the Constitution can be applied during the vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic or during the period between the declaration that the incapacity of the President of the Republic is of permanent character and the election of his successor.
Article 8
The President of the Republic appoints the Prime Minister. He terminates the functions of the Prime Minister when the latter tenders the resignation of the Government.
On the proposal of the Prime Minister, he appoints the other members of the Government and terminates their functions.
Article 9
The President of the Republic presides over the Council of Ministers.
Article 10
The President of the Republic promulgates the laws within fifteen days following the transmission to the Government of law definitely adopted.
He can, before the expiry of this time limit, ask (demander) Parliament to reconsider the law or certain articles. This reconsideration cannot be refused.
Article 11[14]
The President of the Republic, on a proposal by the Government when Parliament is in session or on a joint motion of the two Assemblies, published in either case in the Journal Officiel, can submit to a referendum any Government bill which deals with the organization of the public powers, or with reforms relating to the economic or social policy of the Nation and to the concurrent public services, or which provides for authorization to ratify a treaty that, although not contrary to the Constitution, might affect the functioning of the institutions.
When the referendum is held in response to a proposal by the Government, the latter makes a declaration before each Assembly which is followed by a debate.
When the referendum decides in favor of the Government bill, the President of the Republic promulgates within fifteen days following the proclamation of the results of the vote.
Article 12
The President of the Republic, after consulting the Prime Minister and the Presidents of the Assemblies, can declare the National Assembly dissolved.
General elections take place not less than twenty days and not more than forty days after the dissolution.
The National Assembly convenes as of right on the second Thursday following its election. If it convenes outside the period prescribed for the ordinary session,[15] a session is called by right for a fifteen-day period.
No new dissolution can take place within a year following this election.
Article 13
The President of the Republic signs the ordinances and decrees deliberated on in the Council of Ministers.
He makes appointments to the civil and military posts of the State.
The Councilors of State (conseillers d’État), the Grand Chancellor of the Legion of Honor (grand chancelier de la Légion d’honneur), the ambassadors and envoys extraordinary, the senior members of the Court of Accounts, the prefects, the State representatives in the overseas entities regulated under Article 74 and in New Caledonia,[16] the general officers, the rectors of the academies (recteurs des académies) and the heads of central government services are appointed in the Council of Ministers.
An organic law[17] determines the posts to be filled in the Council of Ministers and the manner in which the power of the President of the Republic to make appointments may be delegated to him to be exercised on his behalf.
Article 14
The President of the Republic accredits ambassadors and envoys extraordinary to foreign powers; foreign ambassadors and envoys extraordinary are accredited to him.
Article 15
The President of the Republic is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces (chef des armées). He presides over the higher national defense councils and committees.
Article 16
When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the Nation, the integrity of its territory or the fulfillment of its international commitments are under serious and immediate threat, and when the proper functioning of the constitutional public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic takes the measures required by these circumstances, after officially consulting the Prime Minister, the Presidents of the Assemblies as well as the Constitutional Council.
He informs the Nation of these measures in a message.
The measures must be prompted by the desire to provide the constitutional public powers, in the shortest possible time, with the means to carry out their duties. The Constitutional Council shall be consulted with regard to such measures.
Parliament convenes as of right.
The National Assembly cannot be dissolved during the exercise of the emergency powers (pouvoirs exceptionnels).
Article 17
The President of the Republic has the right to grant pardons.
Article 18
The President of the Republic communicates with the two Assemblies of Parliament by means of messages, which he causes to be read and which are not followed by any debate.
Between sessions, Parliament is convened especially for this purpose.
Article 19
The Acts of the President of the Republic, other than those provided for under Articles 8 (first paragraph), 11, 12, 16, 18, 54, 56 and 61, are countersigned by the Prime Minister, and if the case requires, by the appropriate ministers.
TITLE III  THE GOVERNMENT
Article 20
The Government determines and conducts the policy of the Nation.
It has at its disposal the civil service and the armed forces.
It is responsible to Parliament under the conditions and procedures stated in Articles 49 and 50.
Article 21
The Prime Minister directs the operation of the Government. He is responsible for National Defense. He assures the execution of the laws. Subject to Article 13, he exercises the regulatory power and makes appointments to civil and military posts.
He may delegate certain of his powers to ministers.
He substitutes, if the case arises, the President of the Republic as chairman of the councils and committees referred to in Article 15.
He can, in exceptional cases, take his place as chairman of a meeting of the Council of Ministers by virtue of an express delegation of powers and for a specific order of the day.
Article 22
The Acts of the Prime Minister are countersigned, when the cases require, by the ministers responsible for their execution.
Article 23
The functions of a member of the Government are incompatible with the exercise of any parliamentary mandate, with any profession representative function at the national level and any public employment or professional activity.
An organic law[18] determines the conditions under which the holders of such mandates, functions or employment shall be replaced.
The replacement of members of Parliament takes place in accordance with the provisions of Article 25.
TITLE IV  THE PARLIAMENT
Article 24
Parliament consists of the National Assembly and the Senate.
The deputies of the National Assembly are elected by direct suffrage.
The Senate is elected by indirect suffrage. It assures the representation of the territorial units of the Republic. French nationals living outside France are represented in the Senate.
Article 25
An organic law[19] determines the term for which each Assembly is elected, the number of its members, their emoluments,[20] the conditions of eligibility, the regime of ineligibilities and incompatibilities.
It determines likewise the conditions under which, in case of vacancy, elections are held to replace deputies and senators until the next general or partial election of the concerned Assembly.
Article 26
No member of Parliament can be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or tried because of opinions expressed, or votes cast in the exercise of their functions.
No member of Parliament can be subjects (objets) in a criminal or correctional matter, of an arrest or of any other measure which deprives or restricts liberty, except with the authorization of the Bureau of the Assembly of which he/she is a member. This authorization is not required, in case of a crime or misdemeanor of final conviction (condamnation définitive).
The detention, subjection to custodial or similar measures, or the prosecution of a member of Parliament are suspended for the duration if the session of the Assembly of which he is a part so requests.
The concerned (intéressée) Assembly shall convene by right for supplementary sessions to permit, as the case may be, the application of the preceding paragraph.[21]
Article 27
Any binding instruction is void.
The right to vote of members of Parliament is personal.
An organic law[22] can authorize, in exceptional cases, voting by proxy (délégation de vote). In such a case, no member can receive more than one vote.
Article 28[23]
The Parliament convenes by right in one ordinary session which begins on the first working day of October and comes to an end on the last working day of June.
The number of days of the ordinary session cannot exceed one hundred twenty days. The weeks of sessions are fixed by each Assembly.
The Prime Minister, after consultation with the President of the Assembly, or the majority of the members of the concerned Assembly, can decide on the holding of the days of supplementary sessions.
The schedule of hours of the sessions are determined by the Rules of each Assembly. One session each month is reserved as a priority, to the agenda fixed by each Assembly.
Article 29
Parliament convenes in extraordinary session, at the request of the Prime Minister or of the majority of the members of the National Assembly, to consider a specific agenda.
When an extraordinary session is held at the request of members of the National Assembly, the decree closing it shall take effect once Parliament has dealt with the agenda for which it was convened, or twelve days after its first sitting, whichever shall be the earlier.
Only the Prime Minister can request a new session before the end of the month following the decree closing an extraordinary session.
Article 30
Apart from the case when Parliament convenes as of right, extraordinary sessions are opened and closed by decree of the President of the Republic.
Article 31
Members of the Government have access to the two Assemblies. They can address either Assembly whenever they demand it.
They may be assisted by government commissioners.
Article 32
The President of the National Assembly is elected for the duration of the term for which the Assembly is elected. The President of the Senate is elected after each partial renewal.
Article 33
The sittings of the two Assemblies are public. A verbatim report of the debates is published in the Journal Officiel.
Each Assembly may sit in camera at the request of the Prime Minister of one-tenth of its members.
TITLE V  ON RELATIONS BETWEEN PARLIAMENT AND THE GOVERNMENT
Article 34
Laws are voted by the Parliament.
Laws establish the rules concerning:
	•	civil rights and fundamental guarantees accorded to citizens for the exercise of their public liberties; the obligations (sujétions) imposed by National Defense upon the citizens with respect to their persons and their properties;
	•	the nationality, the status and the capacity of persons, matrimonial regimes, the inheritances (successions) and gifts (libéralités);
	•	the determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties which are applicable to them; the penal procedure; amnesty; the creation of new orders of jurisdiction and the statute of the magistrates;
	•	the basis, the rates and the methods (modalités) of collecting taxes of all kinds; the regime for the issuance of currency.
The law establishes also the regulations (règles) concerning:
	•	the electoral regime of the parliamentary Assemblies and the local assemblies;
	•	the creation of categories of public institutions;
	•	the fundamental guarantees accorded to civil and military personnel of the State;
	•	the nationalization of enterprises and the transfers of ownership of enterprises from the public to the private sector.
The law determines the fundamental principles of:
	•	the general organization of National Defense;
	•	the free administration of territorial units,[24] their competences and their resources;
	•	education;
	•	the preservation of the environment;[25]
	•	the property regime, real property rights and civil and commercial obligations;
	•	the right to work, union rights and social security.
The financial laws determine the resources and expenditures of the State within the conditions and the reservations specified in an organic law.[26]
Laws concerning the financing of social security determine the general conditions of its financing equilibrium and, taking into account their forecasts of revenues, establish the expenditure targets, within the conditions and the reservations specified in an organic law.[27], [28]
Program laws determine the objectives and the economic and social operation of the State.
The provisions of this article may be developed and completed in an organic law.
Article 35
A declaration of war is authorized by Parliament.
Article 36
The state of siege is decreed in the Council of Ministers.
Its extension beyond twelve days cannot be authorized except by Parliament.
Article 37
Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law have a regulatory character.
Texts in the form of legislation passed concerning these matters may be amended by decree issued after consultation with the Council of State (Conseil d’État). Any such texts which are passed after this Constitution has entered into force can be amended by decree only if the Constitutional Council has declared that they are of a regulatory character as defined in the preceding paragraph.
Article 37-1[29]
Laws and regulations may include, for a limited purpose and duration, experimental provisions.
Article 38
The Government, in order to carry out its program, may ask (demander) Parliament for authorization, for a limited period, to take measures by ordinance that are normally within the domain of law.
The ordinances are issued in the Council of Ministers, after consultation with the Council of State. They come into force upon publication, but shall lapse if the bill to ratify them is not presented to Parliament before the date set by the enabling law (loi d’habilitation).
At the end of the period referred to in the first paragraph of this article, ordinances can be amended only by a law in those matters which are within the legislative domain.
Article 39
The Prime Minister and members of Parliament alike shall have the right to initiate statutes.
Government bills shall be discussed in the Council of Ministers after consultation with the Council of State and shall be introduced in one of the two Assemblies. Finance bills and financing bills concerning social security are first submitted to the National Assembly.[30] Without prejudice to the first paragraph of Article 44, bills concerning the organization of territorial entities and bills on the establishment of French representative bodies outside of France shall be submitted first to the Senate.[31]
Article 40
Bills and amendments introduced by members of Parliament cannot be admissible if their adoption would have as a consequence either a diminution of public resources or the creation or aggravation of public expenditure.
Article 41
If it appears in the course of the legislative process that a bill or amendment is not within the domain of law or is contrary to a delegation granted by virtue of Article 38, the Government may declare its irreceivability.
In case of disagreement between the Government and the President of the Assembly concerned, the Constitutional Council, at the request of one or the other, shall rule within eight days.
Article 42
The discussion of Government bills shall pertain, in the Assembly which first has the bill before it, to the text introduced by the Government.
An Assembly which has before it a text passed by the other Assembly shall deliberate on that text.
Article 43
Government bills and legislative proposals shall, at the request of the Government or of the Assembly having the bill before it, be referred for consideration to committees specially designated for this purpose.
Bills and legislative proposals concerning which such a request has been made shall be referred to one of the permanent committees, the number of which shall be limited to six in each Assembly.
Article 44
Members of Parliament and the Government shall have the right of amendment.
Once the debate has begun, the Government can object to the consideration of any amendment which has not previously been referred to committee.
If the Government so requests, the Assembly having the bill before it shall decide by a single vote on all or part of the text under discussion, on the sole basis of the amendments proposed or accepted by the Government.
Article 45
Every Government or member’s bill shall be considered successively in the two Assemblies of Parliament with a view to the adoption of an identical text.
If, as a result of a disagreement between the two Assemblies, it has proved impossible to adopt a Government or member’s bill after two readings by each Assembly or, if the Government has declared the matter urgent, after a single reading by each of them, the Prime Minister may convene a joint committee, composed of an equal number of members from each Assembly, to propose a text on the provisions still under discussion.
The text drafted by the joint committee can be submitted by the Government to both Assemblies for approval. No amendment shall be admissible without the consent of the Government.
If the joint committee does not succeed in adopting a common text, or if the text is not adopted as provided in the preceding paragraph, the Government may, after a further reading by the National Assembly and by the Senate, ask the National Assembly to make a final decision. In that event, the National Assembly may reconsider either the text drafted by the joint committee, or the last text passed by itself, as modified, if such is the case, by any amendment or amendments adopted by the Senate.
Article 46
Acts of Parliament that the Constitution characterizes as organic laws are voted on and amended as provided in this article.
A Government or member’s bill is not debated and put to the vote in the Assembly in which it was first introduced until fifteen days have elapsed since its introduction.
The procedure set out in Article 45 is applicable. Nevertheless, in the absence of agreement between the two Assemblies, the text may be adopted by the National Assembly on final reading only by an absolute majority of its members.
Organic laws relating to the Senate must be passed in identical terms by the two Assemblies.
Organic laws shall not be promulgated until the Constitutional Council has declared their conformity with the Constitution.
Article 47
Parliament shall pass finance bills in the manner provided by an organic law.[32]
If the National Assembly fails to reach a decision on first reading within forty days following the introduction of a bill, the Government shall refer the bill to the Senate, which must rule within fifteen days. The procedure set out in Article 45 then applies.
If Parliament fails to reach a decision within seventy days, the provisions of the bill may be brought into force by ordinance.
If the finance bill establishing the resources and expenditures for a financial year has not been introduced in time for promulgation before the beginning of that year, the Government shall, as a matter of urgency, ask Parliament for authorization to collect taxes and shall make available by decree the funds needed to meet the commitments already voted for.
The time limits set by this article shall be suspended when Parliament is not in session.
The Court of Accounts shall assist Parliament and the Government in monitoring the implementation of finance Acts.
Article 47-1[33]
The Parliament votes on the law concerning the financing of social security within the conditions specified by an organic law.[34]
If the National Assembly has not reached a decision on the first reading within a time of twenty days after the introduction of the bill, the Government shall refer the bill to the Senate, which must decide within fifteen days. Then the procedure is applied under the conditions specified in Article 45.
If the Parliament has not reached a decision within the time of fifty days the provisions of the bill can be put into effect by ordinance.
The time limits set by this article are suspended when the Parliament is not in session and, with respect to each Assembly, during the weeks when it has decided not to hold a session, in conformity with the second paragraph of Article 28.
The Court of Accounts assists the Parliament and the Government in the control of the application of the laws concerning the financing of social security.
Article 48
Without prejudice to the application of the three last paragraphs of Article 28,[35] the discussion of Government bills and parliamentary bills agreed upon by the Government, has priority on the agenda of the Assemblies, in the order fixed by the Government.
At least[36] one session a week is reserved by priority for questions by members of Parliament and to answers by the Government.
One session per month is reserved, by priority, for the agenda fixed by each Assembly.[37]
Article 49
The Prime Minister, after deliberation by the Council of Ministers, may make the Government’s program or possibly a statement of its general policy an issue of its responsibility before the National Assembly.
The National Assembly may question the responsibility of the Government by the vote on a motion of censure. Such a motion shall be admissible only if it is signed by at least one-tenth of the members of the National Assembly. The vote may only take place forty-eight hours after the motion has been filed; the only votes counted shall be those favorable to the motion of censure, which may be adopted only by a majority of the members comprising the Assembly. Except in the case specified (prévu) in the paragraph below, a deputy cannot be signatory to more than three motions of censure in the course of the same ordinary session and more than one in the course of the same extraordinary session.[38]
The Prime Minister may, after deliberation by the Council of Ministers, make the passing of a bill an issue of the Government’s responsibility before the National Assembly. In that event, the bill shall be considered adopted unless a motion of censure, introduced within the subsequent twenty-four hours, is carried as provided in the preceding paragraph.
The Prime Minister may ask the Senate to approve a statement of general policy.
Article 50
Where the National Assembly carries a motion of censure, or where it fails to endorse the program or a statement of general policy of the Government, the Prime Minister must tender the resignation of the Government to the President of the Republic.
Article 51[39]
The closure of the ordinary session or the extraordinary sessions is delayed by right to permit, should the case arise, the application of Article 49. To this same end, supplementary sessions are of right.
TITLE VI  ON TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
Article 52
The President of the Republic negotiates and ratifies treaties.
He shall be informed of any negotiations for the conclusion of an international agreement not subject to ratification.
Article 53
Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties or agreements relating to international organization, those that commit the finances of the State, those that modify provisions which are matters for statute, those relating to the status of persons, and those that involve the cession, exchange or addition of territory, can be ratified or approved only by virtue of an Act of Parliament.
They shall not take effect until they have been ratified or approved.
No cession, exchange or addition of territory is valid without the consent of the population concerned.
Article 53-1[40]
The Republic can conclude, with European States that are bound by commitments identical with its own in the matter of asylum and the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, agreements determining their respective jurisdiction in regard to the consideration of requests for asylum submitted to them.
However, even if the request does not fall within their jurisdiction under the terms of these agreements, the authorities of the Republic always have the right to grant asylum to any foreigner who is persecuted for his action in pursuit of freedom or who seeks the protection of France for some other reason.
Article 53-2[41]
The Republic can recognize the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice under the conditions specified by the Treaty signed on July 18, 1998.
Article 54
If the Constitutional Council, on a reference from the President of the Republic, from the Prime Minister, from the President of one or the other Assembly, or from sixty deputies or sixty senators,[42] has declared that an international commitment contains a clause contrary to the Constitution, authorization to ratify or approve the international commitment in question[43] may be given only after amendment of the Constitution.
Article 55
Treaties or agreements duly ratified or approved, upon publication, prevail over Acts of Parliament, subject, in regard to each agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party.
TITLE VII  THE CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL
Article 56
The Constitutional Council consists of nine members, whose term of office is nine years and is not renewable. One-third of the membership of the Constitutional Council shall be renewed every three years. Three of its members are appointed by the President of the Republic, three by the President of the National Assembly and three by the President of the Senate.
In addition to the nine members provided for above, former Presidents of the Republic shall be ex-officio life members of the Constitutional Council.
The President [of the Constitutional Council] is appointed by the President of the Republic. He has the preponderant vote in the event of a tie.
Article 57
The office of member of the Constitutional Council is incompatible with that of minister or member of Parliament. Other incompatibilities are specified by an organic law.
Article 58
The Constitutional Council watches over the proper conduct of the election of the President of the Republic.
It examines complaints and declares the results of the vote.
Article 59
The Constitutional Council rules on the proper conduct of the election of deputies and senators in disputed cases.
Article 60
The Constitutional Council ensures the proper conduct of referendum proceedings provided for by Articles 11 and 89[44] and in Title XV. It proclaims the results of the referendum.[45]
Article 61
Organic laws, before their promulgation, and the rules of procedure of the parliamentary Assemblies, before their entry into force, must be referred to the Constitutional Council, which shall rule on their conformity with the Constitution.
To the same end, Acts of Parliament may be referred to the Constitutional Council, before their promulgation, by the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate, or sixty deputies or sixty senators.[46]
In the cases referred to in the two preceding paragraphs, the Constitutional Council must rule within one month. However, at the request of the Government, if the matter is urgent, this period shall be reduced to eight days.
In these same cases, reference to the Constitutional Council suspends the time limit for promulgation.
Article 62
A provision declared unconstitutional can neither be promulgated nor implemented.
The decisions of the Constitutional Council are not susceptible to any appeal. They are binding on public authorities and on all administrative authorities and all courts.
Article 63
An organic law[47] determines the rules of organization and the operation of the Constitutional Council, the procedure to be followed before it and, in particular, the time limits allowed for referring disputes to it.
TITLE VIII  ON JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
Article 64
The President of the Republic is the guarantor of the independence of the judicial authority.
He is assisted by the High Council of the Judiciary.
An organic law[48] determines the regulations governing the members of the judiciary.
Judges are irremovable.
Article 65
The High Council of the Judiciary is presided over by the President of the Republic. The Minister of Justice is its vice-president ex-officio. He may stand in (Il peut suppléer) for the President of the Republic.
The High Council of the Judiciary consists of two sections, one with jurisdiction for judges, the other for public prosecutors.
The section with jurisdiction for judges comprises, in addition to the President of the Republic and the Minister of Justice, five judges and one public prosecutor, one Councilor of State (conseiller d’État) appointed by the Council of State (Conseil d’État), and three prominent citizens who are members neither of Parliament nor of the judiciary, appointed by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly and the President of the Senate, respectively.
The section with jurisdiction for public prosecutors comprises, in addition to the President of the Republic and the Minister of Justice, five public prosecutors and one judge, and the Councilor of State and the three prominent citizens referred to the preceding paragraph.
The section of the High Council of the Judiciary with jurisdiction for judges makes nominations for the appointment of judges in the Court of Cassation (Cour de cassation),[49] the first presidents of the court of appeal and the presidents of the superior court (tribunal de grande instance). Other judges shall be appointed with its assent.
It shall act as the disciplinary council for judges. When acting in that capacity, it shall be presided over by the first president of the Court of Cassation.
The section of the High Council of the Judiciary with jurisdiction for public prosecutors shall give its opinion on the appointment of public prosecutors, with the exception of posts to be filled in the Council of Ministers.
It shall give its opinion on disciplinary penalties with regard to public prosecutors. When acting in that capacity, it shall be presided over by the chief public prosecutor at the Court of Cassation.
An organic law[50] determines the manner in which this article is to implemented.[51]
Article 66
No one may be arbitrarily detained.
The judicial authority, guardian of individual liberty, ensures the observance of this principle under the conditions specified by law.
TITLE IX  THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
Article 67
A High Court of Justice is established.
It is composed, in equal number, of every member elected from among their ranks by the National Assembly and the Senate, after general or partial renewal by election of these Assemblies. It elects its President from among its members.
An organic law[52] determines the composition of the High Court of Justice, its rules of functioning and the procedure applicable before it.
Article 68
The President of the Republic is not responsible for acts performed in the exercise of his duties except in the case of high treason. He may be indicted only by the two Assemblies deciding by identical votes in open voting and by an absolute majority of their members. He is judged by the High Court of Justice.[53]
TITLE X  ON THE PENAL RESPONSIBILITY OF MEMBERS OF THE GOVERNMENT
Article 68-1[54]
Members of the Government are penally responsible for acts in the exercise of their functions and classified as serious crimes and offenses at the time they were committed.[55]
They are judged by the Court of Justice of the Republic.
The Court of Justice of the Republic is bound by the definition of serious crimes and offenses and the determination of penalties resulting from the law.
Article 68-2[56]
The Court of Justice of the Republic consists of fifteen members: twelve members of Parliament, elected in equal number from among their ranks by the National Assembly and the Senate after every general or partial renewal by election of these Assemblies, and three judges of the Court of Cassation, one of whom shall preside over the Court of Justice of the Republic.
Any person claiming to be a victim of a crime or offense committed by a member of the Government in the exercise of his duties may lodge a complaint with a petitions committee.
This committee shall order the case to be either closed or forwarded to the chief public prosecutor at the Court of Cassation for referral to the Court of Justice of the Republic.
The chief public prosecutor at the Court of Cassation may also make a reference ex-officio to the Court of Justice of the Republic with the assent of the petitions committee.
An organic law[57] determines the conditions of the application of this article.
Article 68-3[58]
The provisions of the present title are applicable to acts committed before its entry into force.
TITLE XI  THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
Article 69
The Economic and Social Council, on a reference from the Government, shall give its opinion on Government bills, draft ordinances or decrees, and members’ bills that have been submitted to it.
A member of the Economic and Social Council can be designated by the Council to present, to the parliamentary Assemblies, the opinion of the Council on such bills or drafts that have been submitted to it.
Article 70
The Economic and Social Council may also be consulted by the Government on any problems of an economic or social character.[59] Any plan or any bill dealing with a plan of an economic or social character is submitted to it for its advice.
Article 71
The composition of the Economic and Social Council and its rules of procedure shall be determined by an institutional organic law.[60]
TITLE XII  THE TERRITORIAL UNITS
Article 72[61]
The territorial entities of the Republic are the communes, the departments, the regions, the entities with particular status and the overseas entities regulated under Article 74. All other territorial entities are created by the law, if need be in replacement of one or more entities mentioned under the present paragraph.
The territorial entities are meant to make decisions for all of the jurisdictions which can be best established at their level.
In compliance with the conditions set forth by the law, these entities shall freely govern themselves through elected councils and shall dispose of a statutory power for the exercise of their jurisdiction.
In compliance with the conditions set forth by the organic law, and except when the essential conditions of exercise of a public liberty or of a constitutionally protected right are at stake, territorial entities or groups of them may, when, depending on the case, either laws or regulations enable it, depart from, as an experiment and for a limited purpose and duration, the legal or regulatory provisions which govern the exercise of their jurisdiction.
No territorial entity may supervise another. Yet, when the exercise of a jurisdiction requires the cooperation of several territorial entities, the law may authorize one among them or a group of them to determine the terms and conditions of their common conduct.
In the territorial entities of the Republic, the representative of the State, who is representative of each of the members of the Government, shall be responsible for the national interests, administrative supervision and law enforcement.
Article 72-1[62]
The law sets the conditions under which voters of each territorial entity can, by exercising their petition right, ask to have added on the agenda of the deliberating assembly of this entity, a question falling under its jurisdiction.
In compliance with the conditions set forth by the organic law, projects of deliberations or other acts falling under the jurisdiction of a territorial entity may, at its initiative, be submitted, by referendum, to the decision of the voters of this entity.
When the creation of a territorial entity endowed with a particular status or the modification of its organization is contemplated, it may be decided by law to consult the voters registered within the concerned entities. The modification of the boundaries of the territorial entities may also give rise to a consultation of voters pursuant to the conditions set by law.
Article 72-2[63]
The territorial entities shall benefit from resources that they can dispose of freely in respect of the conditions set by law.
They may receive all or part of the proceeds of any kind of taxation. The law may authorize them to set the basis and rate of such taxation within the limits set by law.
Tax yields and other specific resources of the territorial entities shall represent, for each category of entities, a predominant part of all their resources. The organic law shall determine the conditions under which this rule shall be applied.
All transfer of jurisdiction between the State and the territorial entities shall be accompanied by the allocation of resources equivalent to those that were previously attributed to the exercise of such jurisdiction. All creation or extension of jurisdiction having as a consequence an increase of the territorial entities’ expenditures shall be accompanied by resources set by law.
The law shall establish the adjustment provisions meant to favor equality among territorial entities.
Article 72-3[64]
The Republic recognizes, among the people of France, the overseas populations, in a common goal of liberty, equality and fraternity.
Guadeloupe, Guyana, Martinique, Reunion, Mayotte, Saint-Pierre and Miquelon, Wallis and Futuna Islands and French Polynesia shall be governed by Article 73 for the overseas departments and regions and for the territorial entities created pursuant to the last paragraph of Article 73, and by Article 74 for other entities.
The status of New Caledonia shall be regulated under Title XIII.
The law shall determine the legislative system and the particular organization of the French Southern and Antarctic lands.
Article 72-4[65]
No modification, for all or part of one of the entities mentioned under the second paragraph of Article 72-3, from one of the systems provided under Article 73 and 74 to another, shall intervene without first obtaining the consent of the voters of the entity or the part of the concerned entity pursuant to the conditions stipulated under the following paragraph. This modification of the system shall be decided by an organic law.
The President of the Republic, on the proposal of the Government during the sessions or on the common proposal of the two assemblies, published in the Journal Officiel, may decide to consult the voters of an overseas territorial entity on a question concerning its organization, its jurisdiction, or legislative system. When the consultation concerns a change as provided under the preceding paragraph and is organized based on a Government proposal, the Government makes a declaration before each assembly, followed by a debate.
Article 73[66]
In the overseas departments and regions, the laws and regulations shall be fully applicable. They may be subject to adaptations due to the particular characteristics and constraints of these entities.
These adaptations may be decided by these entities in the fields covered by their jurisdiction and if the law has enabled them to do so.
Notwithstanding the first paragraph and to take into account their specificity, the entities regulated under the present article may be entitled by the law to determine themselves the rules which are applicable to their territories, in a limited number of subject matters which may fall within the scope of the law.
These rules may not concern nationality, civil rights, public liberty guarantees, the human status and capacity, the organization of justice, criminal law, criminal procedure, foreign policy, defense, public security and order, currency, credit and the exchange, as well as electoral law. This list may be made more precise and completed by an organic law.
The provision stipulated under the two preceding paragraphs shall not be applicable in the department and the region of Reunion.
The entitlements provided under the second and third paragraphs shall be decided, upon request by the concerned entity, pursuant to the conditions and within the limits stipulated by an organic law. These entitlements may not intervene when the basic conditions of exercise of a public liberty or of a constitutionally guaranteed right are at stake.
The creation, by the law, of an entity taking the place of an overseas department and region or the creation of a single deliberating assembly for these two entities, shall not occur unless, pursuant to the specifications of the second paragraph of Article 72-4, the consent of the registered voters in the resort of these entities is validated.
Article 74[67]
The overseas entities regulated under the present article shall have a status which takes into consideration the specific interests of each one of them among the Republic.
This status shall be determined by an organic law, adopted after consultation of the deliberating assembly, which shall set:
	•	The conditions under which the laws and regulations shall apply there;
	•	the jurisdiction of this entity; except for the jurisdiction already exercised by the entity, the transfer of jurisdiction from the State may not concern subject matters enumerated under the fourth paragraph of Article 73, made more precise and completed, if applicable, by the organic law;
	•	the rules governing the organization and the function of the entity’s institutions and the electoral system of its deliberating assembly;
	•	the conditions under which its institutions are consulted concerning projects and bills of law and the projects of ordinance or decree which include provisions specific to the entity, as well as concerning the ratification or approval of international agreements within the scope of its jurisdiction.
The organic law may determine as well, for the ones among these entities which are endowed with autonomy, the conditions under which:
	•	the Council of State (Conseil d’État) shall exercise a specific jurisdictional supervision over certain categories of actions by the deliberating assembly which acts pursuant to the competence it exercises in the field of the law;
	•	the deliberating assembly may modify a law promulgated after the entity’s status has come into force, when the Constitutional Council, seized notably by the entity’s authorities, has ascertained that the law had intervened in the jurisdictional domain of the entity;
	•	the measures justified by the local needs may be taken by the entity in favor of its population, in the fields of employment access, of the right to settle and exercise a professional activity or of the protection of real estate property;
	•	the entity may participate, under supervision of the State, to the exercise of its remaining jurisdiction, without violating the guarantees granted on all of the national territory for the exercise of public liberties.
Other terms and conditions of the specific organization of the entities falling under the present article shall be defined and modified by the law after consultation of their deliberating assembly.
Article 74-1[68]
In the overseas entities referred to under Article 74 and in New Caledonia, the Government may, in the matters of state jurisdiction, expand by ordinance, with necessary adaptations, the legislative provisions which are applicable in mainland France, under the condition that the laws have not expressly excluded, for the implicated provisions, recourse to this procedure.
The ordinances shall be taken during the Council of Ministers, after consultation of the concerned deliberating assemblies and of the Council of State. They shall come into effect as soon as published. They shall become obsolete in the absence of ratification by Parliament within eighteen months following this publication.
Article 75
Citizens of the Republic who do not have ordinary civil status, the only one referred to in Article 34, shall retain their personal status so long as they have not renounced it.
Article 76[69]
[Abrogated]
TITLE XIII[70], [71]  TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING NEW CALEDONIA
Article 76
The populations of New Caledonia are called on to express their opinion before December 31, 1998, on the provisions of the agreement signed at Nouméa on May 5, 1998, and published May 27, 1998, in the Official Journal of the French Republic.
The persons fulfilling the conditions specified in Article 2 of Law No. 88-1028 of November 9, 1988, are allowed to participate in the ballot.
The measures necessary for the organization of the ballot are taken by decree in the Council of State, after deliberation in the Council of Ministers.
Article 77
After approval of the agreement at the time of the consultation specified by Article 76, the organic law, established following the opinion (avis) of the deliberating assembly of New Caledonia, determines, with the view of assuring the evolution of New Caledonia, while respecting the objectives (orientations) defined by that agreement and according to the modalities necessary for its implementation:
	•	the competences of the State which will be transferred, in a definitive manner to the institutions of New Caledonia, the time intervals (échelonnement) and the modalities of these transfers, as well as the distribution of the responsibilities (charges) resulting from them;
	•	the rules of organization and of functioning of the institutions of New Caledonia and in particular the conditions within which certain categories of acts of the deliberating Assembly may be presented to the control of the Constitutional Council before publication;
	•	the rules relating to citizenship, to the electoral regime, to employment and to the customary civil status;
	•	the conditions and the time periods within which the interested populations of New Caledonia will be called on to express their opinion about the accession to full sovereignty.
The other measures required for the implementation of the agreement mentioned in Article 76 are defined by the law.
TITLE XIV  ON ASSOCIATION AGREEMENTS
Article 88
The Republic[72] can conclude agreements with States that wish to associate themselves with it to develop their civilizations.
TITLE XV[73], [74]  ON THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES AND THE EUROPEAN UNION
Article 88-1
The Republic participates in the European Communities and in the European Union constituted by States that have freely chosen, by virtue of the treaties that established them, to exercise some of their competences in common.
It can participate in the European Union subject to the conditions provided for in the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe signed on October 29, 2004.[75]
Article 88-2
Under reservation of reciprocity, and according to modalities specified by the Treaty of European Union signed on February 7, 1992, France consents to the transfer of competences necessary for the establishment of the European Economic and Monetary Union.[76]
With the same reservation and according to the modalities provided by the treaty establishing the European Community, in its wording resulting from the treaty signed October 2, 1997, the transfer of competences necessary for the determination of the rules concerning the free movement of persons and the domains which are linked (liés) to it, may be consented to.[77]
The law shall determine the rules relating to the European arrest warrant pursuant to the acts adopted under the Treaty of European Union.[78]
Article 88-3
Subject to reciprocity and in accordance with the terms of the Treaty of European Union signed on February 7, 1992, the right to vote and stand as a candidate in municipal elections can be accorded only to citizens of the Union residing in France. Such citizens shall neither exercise the office of mayor or deputy mayor nor participate in the designation of Senate electors or in the election of senators. An organic law[79] passed in identical terms by the two Assemblies shall determine the conditions of application of this article.
Article 88-4[80]
The Government submits to the National Assembly and the Senate, upon transmission from the Council of the European Union, the bills or proposals of Acts of the European Communities and the European Union, involving provisions of legislative nature. It may also present to them other bills or proposals of acts as well as any document emanating from an institution of the European Union.
In accordance with the modalities determined by the rules of procedure of each Assembly, resolutions may be voted, in case of need even out of session, on the drafts, proposals or documents mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
Article 88-5[81]
Any government bill authorizing the ratification of a treaty relating the accession of a state to the European Union and the European Communities is submitted to a referendum by the President of the Republic.
TITLE XV[82], [83]  ON THE EUROPEAN UNION
Article 88-1
Subject to the conditions determined by the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe signed on October 29, 2004, the French Republic participates in the European Union, constituted by states which have freely chosen to exercise some of their competences in common.
Article 88-2
The law shall determine the rules relating to the European arrest warrant pursuant to the acts adopted by the institutions of the European Union.
Article 88-3
The right to vote and stand as a candidate in municipal elections can be accorded to citizens of the European Union residing in France. Such citizens shall neither exercise the office of mayor or deputy mayor nor participate in the designation of Senate electors or in the election of senators. An organic law passed in identical terms by the two Assemblies shall determine the conditions of application of this article.
Article 88-4
The Government submits to the National Assembly and the Senate, upon their transmission by the Council of the European Union, the draft European legislative acts as well as drafts and proposals of acts containing provisions of a legislative nature. It may also submit to them drafts and proposals of other acts as well as any document from a European institution.
In accordance with the modalities established by the rules of procedure of each Assembly, resolutions may be voted, in case of need even out of session, on the drafts, proposals or documents mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
Article 88-5
The National Assembly or the Senate can issue a reasoned opinion on the conformity of a draft European legislative act with the principle of subsidiarity. The opinion is forwarded by the President of the Assembly concerned to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission of the European Union. The Government is kept informed.
Each Assembly can bring an action before the Court of Justice of the European Union against a European legislative act for violation of the principle of subsidiarity. The action is transmitted to the Court of Justice of the European Union by the Government.
To this effect, resolutions can be adopted, in case of need even out of session, in accordance with the modalities for initiative and discussion established by the rules of procedure of each Assembly.
Article 88-6
By the adoption of a draft resolution voted in identical terms by the National Assembly and the Senate, Parliament may oppose a modification of the rules governing the adoption of acts of the European Union under the simplified revision procedure of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe.
Article 88-7
Any Government bill authorizing the ratification of a treaty relating to the accession of a state to the European Union is submitted to a referendum by the President of the Republic.
TITLE XVI  ON THE REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION
Article 89
The initiative for the revision of the Constitution belongs concurrently to the President of the Republic, on a proposal by the Prime Minister, and to members of Parliament.
A Government or parliamentary bill to amend the Constitution must be passed by the two Assemblies in identical terms. The amendment shall have effect after approval by referendum.
A Government bill to amend the Constitution shall not be submitted to referendum if the President of the Republic decides to submit it to Parliament convened in Congress; the Government bill to amend the Constitution shall then be approved only if it is adopted by a three-fifths majority of the votes cast. The Bureau of the Congress shall be that of the National Assembly.
No amendment procedure shall be commenced or continued where the integrity of the territory is jeopardized.
The republican form of government cannot be the object of an amendment.
TITLE XVII[84]
[Abrogated]

NOTES
[1] This text has been integrated to include all amendments to the original document up to and including Constitutional Law No. 2005-205 of March 1, 2005. It is to be noted that the entry into force of the new Article 88 is conditional upon the entry into force of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe.
[2] The last sentence was inserted by Article 1 of Constitutional Law No. 2005-205 of March 1, 2005; reference is made and the rights and obligations of the Charter on the Environment of 2004 was incorporated.
[3] Amended in its entirety by Article 8-I of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[4] The last sentence was amended by Article 1 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003; the addition of decentralized nature of the organization was made.
[5] Amended by Article 1 of Constitutional Law No. 92-554 of June 25, 1992.
[6] This paragraph was amended by Article 1 of Constitutional Law No. 99-569 of July 8, 1999.
[7] This paragraph was amended by Article 2 of Constitutional Law No. 99-569 of July 8, 1999.
[8] The last phrase was amended by Article 9 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995; reference to the accords of the communities was removed.
[9] Inserted in its entirety by Article 1 of Law No. 62-1292 of November 6, 1962.
[10] Amended by Constitutional Law No. 2000-964 of October 2, 2000; the change was made from seven years to five years.
[11] Inserted in its entirety by Article 2 of Law No. 62-1292 of November 6, 1962.
[12] Amended by Article 12-I of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003; the change was made from the “second following Sunday” to the “fourteenth following day.”
[13] The previous four paragraphs were amended by Constitutional Law No. 76-527 of June 18, 1976.
[14] Article 11 was amended in its entirety by Article 1 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[15] This phrase was amended by Article 3 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995; previously, it read: “the periods prescribed for the ordinary sessions.”
[16] This phrase was amended by Article 12-II of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003; previously, it read: “the government representatives of the overseas territories.”
[17] Specifically, Ordinance No. 58-1136 of November 28, 1958.
[18] Specifically, Ordinance No. 58-1099 of November 17, 1958.
[19] Specifically, Ordinance No. 58-998 of October 24, 1958 and Ordinance No. 58-1097 of November 15, 1958.
[20] As determined by Ordinance No. 58-1210 of December 13, 1958.
[21] Paragraphs 2-4 were amended by Article 7 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[22] Specifically, Ordinance No. 58-1066 of November 7, 1958.
[23] Article 28 was amended in its entirety by Article 2 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[24] As amended by Article 2 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003; the change was made from “local units” to “territorial units.”
[25] This point was inserted by Article 3 of Constitutional Law No. 2005-205 of March 1, 2005.
[26] Specifically, Ordinance No. 59-2 of January 2, 1959, regarding the law of finances, and Organic Law No. 2001-692 of August 1, 2001, regarding finances.
[27] Specifically, Organic Law No. 96-646 of July 22, 1996.
[28] This paragraph was amended by Article 1 of Constitutional Law No. 96-138 of February 22, 1998.
[29] Article 37-1 was inserted by Article 3 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003.
[30] This sentence was amended by Article 2 of Constitutional Law No. 96-138 of February 22, 1996.
[31] This sentence was amended by Article 4 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003.
[32] Specifically, Ordinance No. 59-2 of January 2, 1959.
[33] Article 47-1 was inserted by Article 3 of Constitutional Law No. 96-138 of February 22, 1996.
[34] Specifically, Organic Law No. 96-646 of July 22, 1996.
[35] The first part of this sentence was inserted by Article 4-I of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[36] This qualifier was inserted by Article 4-II of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[37] This last paragraph was inserted by Article 4-III of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[38] This last sentence was amended by Article 5 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995. Previously, it read: “If the motion of censure is rejected, the signatories may not propose a new motion [of censure] during the same session, except in the case provided by the following paragraph.”
[39] Article 51 was amended by Article 6 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995; the addition of the last sentence was made. The amended language adds the right of supplementary sessions should the need arise.
[40] Article 53-1 was inserted by Constitutional Law No. 93-1256 of November 25, 1993.
[41] Article 53-2 was inserted by Constitutional Law No. 99-568 of July 8, 1999.
[42] The previous phrase (of “sixty deputies and sixty senators”) was inserted by Article 2 of Constitutional Law No. 92-554 of June 25, 1992.
[43] The previous phrase (regarding international commitment) was amended by Article 2 of Constitutional Law No. 92-554 of June 25, 1992.
[44] The preceding article numbers were amended by Article 12-III of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003.
[45] The addition of “Title XV” was made by Article 2-II of Constitutional Law No. 2005-204 of March 1, 2005.
[46] The second paragraph was amended by Constitutional Law No. 74-904 of October 29, 1974.
[47] Specifically, Ordinance No. 58-1067 of November 7, 1958.
[48] Specifically, Ordinance No. 58-1270 of December 22, 1958.
[49] The Cour de cassation is the highest court in the French judicial system and is equivalent in function and stature to the United States Supreme Court.
[50] Specifically, Ordinance No. 58-1270 of December 22, 1958, regarding the statute on magistrature; modified by Organic Law No. 94-101 of February 5, 1994 and Constitutional Council 93-337 DC of January 20, 1994.
[51] Paragraphs 2 through 8 were amended by Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993.
[52] Specifically, Ordinance No. 59-1 of January 2, 1959.
[53] Paragraph 2 of Article 68 was abrograted by Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993.
[54] Article 68-1 was inserted by Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993.
[55] This first sentence was taken from the former paragraph 2 of Article 68.
[56] Article 68-2 was inserted by Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993.
[57] Specifically, Organic Law No. 93-1252 of November 26, 1993.
[58] Article 68-3 was inserted by Article 10 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[59] The words “interesting the Republic of the Community” at the end of this sentence were removed by Article 11 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[60] Specifically, Ordinance No. 58-1360 of December 29, 1958.
[61] Article 72 was amended and expanded significantly by Article 5 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003. Prior to amendment, it read:
Article 72
The territorial units of the Republic are the communes, the departments and the overseas territories. Any other territorial unit is established by law.
These units are self-governing through elected councils and in the manner provided by law.
In the departments and the territories, the delegate of the Government is responsible for national interests, administrative control and observance of the law.
[62] Article 72-1 was inserted by Article 6 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003.
[63] Article 72-2 was inserted by Article 7 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003.
[64] Article 72-3 was inserted by Article 8 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003.
[65] Article 72-4 was inserted by Article 8 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003.
[66] Article 73 was amended and expanded upon in its entirety by Article 9 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003. Prior to amendment, Article 73 read:
Article 73
Measures may be taken to adapt the legislative system and administrative organization of the overseas departments to their particular situation.
[67] Article 74 was amended in its entirety by Article 10 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003. Prior to amendment, Article 74 read:
Article 74
The overseas territories of the Republic shall have a particular form of organization which takes account of their own interests with due regard for the general interest of the Republic.
The statutes governing the overseas territories are established by organic laws that define, especially, the competences of their own institutions; and modified in accordance after consultation with the territorial assembly concerned.
Other modalities of their particular form of organization shall be defined by law after consultation with the territorial assembly concerned.
Article 74 had previously been amended by Article 3 of Constitutional Law No. 92-554 of June 25, 1992. The original Article 74 stated:
The overseas territories of the Republic shall have a particular form of organization which takes account of their own interests with due regard for the general interest of the Republic. This organization is defined and modified by the law after consultation with the territorial assembly concerned.
[68] Article 74-1 was inserted by Article 11 of Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003.
[69] Article 76 was abrogated by Article 12 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[70] The former “Title XIII: Of the Community,” which had contained Articles 77 to 87, was abrogated by Article 14 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[71] Title XIII was reinstated by Constitutional Law No. 98-610 of July 20, 1998 as “Title XIII: Transitional Provisions Concerning New Calendonia,” and consists of a new Article 76 and 77.
[72] “The Republic and the Community” was replaced with “The Republic” by Article 13 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.
[73] Title XV was inserted by Article 5 of Constitutional Law No. 92-554 of June 25, 1992.
[74] This is the current text of Title XV, which remains in force until the entry into force of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe; see Article 3 of Constitutional Law No. 2005-204 of March 1, 2005, which amends Title XV. For reference, the new language of Title XV: On the European Union follows the current text in this document.
[75] Paragraph 2 of Article 88-1 was inserted by Article 1 of Constitutional Law No. 2005-204 of March 1, 2005.
[76] The last half of this sentence was removed by Article 1-I of Constitutional Law No. 99-49 of January 25, 1999.
[77] Paragraph 2 of Article 88-2 was inserted by Article 1-II of Constitutional Law No. 99-49 of January 25, 1999.
[78] Paragraph 3 of Article 88-2 was completed by Constitutional Law No. 2003-267 of March 25, 2003.
[79] Specifically, Organic Law No. 98-404 of May 25, 1998.
[80] Article 88-4 was amended in its entirety by Article 2 of Constitutional Law No. 99-49 of January 25, 1999.
[81] Amended by Article 2 of Constitutional Law No. 2005-204 of March 1, 2005. Article 4 of the same Law states the provision does not apply to an accession which results from an intergovernmental conference that had been convened by the European Council prior to July 1, 2004.
[82] The following text of Title XV (Article 88) is the amended text which will be in force after the entry into force of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe.
[83] Article 88, in its entirety, is amended by Article 3 of Constitutional Law No. 2005-204 of March 1, 2005. Article 4 of the same Law states that the new Article 88-7―as well as its present version in Article 88-5―does not apply to an accession which results from an intergovernmental conference that had been convened by the European Council prior to July 1, 2004.
[84] “Title XVII: Transitional Dispositions” was abrograted by Article 14 of Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995.

